\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nael.info
@settitle Nael – A humble Emacs major-mode for Lean
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Nael: (nael).         Major mode for Lean.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Nael – A humble Emacs major-mode for Lean
@author Mekeor Melire
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Nael – A humble Emacs major-mode for Lean

Nael is a package for GNU Emacs providing a humble major-mode for the
@uref{https://lean-lang.org/, Lean} programming-language and theorem-prover.

“Nael” is “Lean” reversed and ends in “el” as in Emacs-Lisp.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Usage::
* About::
* Alternatives::
* Changelog::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

About

* Status::
* License::

Alternatives

* History::
* Comparison::

Changelog

* Version 0.3.0 released on @emph{<2024-11-19 Tue>}: Version 030 released on @emph{<2024-11-19 Tue>}. 
* Version 0.2.2 released on @emph{<2024-07-05 Fri>}: Version 022 released on @emph{<2024-07-05 Fri>}. 

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

@enumerate
@item
@uref{https://lean-lang.org/lean4/doc/setup.html, Install Lean}.
@item
Install Nael. For example, manually:
@enumerate
@item
Clone the Git repository.
@example
git clone https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael.git ~/path/to/nael
@end example
@item
Set up @code{load-path}.
@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/nael")
@end lisp
@end enumerate
@item
Load Nael.  (Nael does not autoload anything.)
@lisp
(require 'nael)
@end lisp
@item
Optionally, configure Nael.
@lisp
(defun my-nael-setup ()
  (interactive)
  ;; Enable Emacs' built-in `TeX' input-method.  Alternatively, you
  ;; could install the external `unicode-math-input' package and
  ;; use the `unicode-math' input-method.
  (set-input-method "TeX")
  ;; Enable Emacs' built-in LSP-client Eglot.
  (eglot-ensure))

(add-hook 'nael-mode-hook #'my-nael-setup)

;; Nael buffer-locally sets `compile-command' to "lake build".
(keymap-set nael-mode-map "C-c C-c" #'project-compile)

;; Find out how to type the character at point in the current
;; input-method.
(keymap-set nael-mode-map "C-c C-k" #'quail-show-key)
@end lisp
@end enumerate

@node About
@chapter About

@menu
* Status::
* License::
@end menu

@node Status
@section Status

Nael is actively maintained but still in rather early stage of
development.  Thus, it is not as fully featured as @samp{lean4-mode} and
may of course contain severe bugs.

@node License
@section License

This program is based on lean4-mode which is licensed under
Apache-2.0.  Additions and modifications made within this repository
are licensed under GNU General Public License version 3 or later.

@node Alternatives
@chapter Alternatives

@menu
* History::
* Comparison::
@end menu

@node History
@section History

@enumerate
@item
@emph{Microsoft Corp.®} et al. developed @uref{https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean4-mode, lean4-mode} based on @uref{https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode, lsp-mode}.
@item
@emph{Richard Copley} developed a @uref{https://github.com/bustercopley/lean4-mode, fork} based on Emacs' built-in @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/eglot/, Eglot}.
@item
@emph{Mekeor Melire} developed a fork based on Richard Copley's fork.
It is called Nael and strives to be more humble by relying on
Emacs' built-in facilities, like Eglot, ElDoc and Project.
@end enumerate

@node Comparison
@section Comparison

@itemize
@item
Nael does not depend on third-party lsp-mode.  Instead, you can
optionally use Nael together with Emacs' built-in LSP-client Eglot.
@item
Nael does not offer any special buffer for information on the
current goal etc.  Instead, Nael introduces two ElDoc documentation
functions which will show up in the usual ElDoc buffer.
@item
Nael does not offer any special mechanism to detect the current
project.  Instead, it introduces Lakefiles as Project root markers.
@item
Nael does not offer any special command to build the current
project.  Instead, it configures the built-in @code{project-compile}
command to work.
@item
Nael does not offer any special input-method.  Instead, you may use
the built-in @samp{TeX} input-method or the @samp{unicode-math} from the
external @uref{https://github.com/astoff/unicode-math-input.el, unicode-math-input} package.
@item
Nael does not solely use the Apache-2 license.  Instead, it is
licensed partly under Apache-2, and partly under GPLv3+.
Altogether, you can treat Nael as if it was under GPLv3+ since
that's the stricter license.
@end itemize

@node Changelog
@chapter Changelog

This changelog only describes user-facing changes.

@menu
* Version 0.3.0 released on @emph{<2024-11-19 Tue>}: Version 030 released on @emph{<2024-11-19 Tue>}. 
* Version 0.2.2 released on @emph{<2024-07-05 Fri>}: Version 022 released on @emph{<2024-07-05 Fri>}. 
@end menu

@node Version 030 released on @emph{<2024-11-19 Tue>}
@section Version 0.3.0 released on @emph{<2024-11-19 Tue>}

@itemize
@item
Deprecate Nael.
@end itemize

@node Version 022 released on @emph{<2024-07-05 Fri>}
@section Version 0.2.2 released on @emph{<2024-07-05 Fri>}

@itemize
@item
Fix link to homepage (@uref{https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael}).
@item
Add links to Nael customization group.
@item
Support Imenu even if Eglot is not enabled.
@item
When customizing Nael mode hook, suggest functions.
@end itemize

@bye
