\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename nael.info
@settitle Nael — An Emacs major mode for Lean
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Nael: (nael).         Major mode for Lean.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Nael — An Emacs major mode for Lean
@author Mekeor Melire
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Nael — An Emacs major mode for Lean

Nael is a set of packages extending @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/, GNU Emacs} for editing @uref{https://lean-lang.org, Lean} sources.  It is a radically refactored fork of @uref{https://github.com/leanprover-community/lean4-mode, Lean4-Mode} with focus on simplicity, modularity and integration into Emacs' core.  It's still at an early stage of development.

The @code{nael} package defines a major mode.  In a modular, unobtrusive way, it also defines simple and complex abbreviations per @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Abbrevs.html, Abbrev} and @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/autotype/, Skeleton} respectively.  It teaches Emacs' built-in @uref{https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/ Language Server Protocol, LSP} client @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/eglot/, Eglot} about @uref{https://github.com/leanprover/lean4/blob/master/src/Lean/Data/Lsp/Extra.lean, Lean-specific LSP-extensions} and tells @uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/html_node/emacs/Programming-Language-Doc.html, ElDoc} to display that information, similar to the “@uref{https://github.com/leanprover/vscode-lean4/blob/master/vscode-lean4/manual/manual.md#infoview, info view}” in @uref{https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=leanprover.lean4, vscode-lean} that many are familiar with.  For users who prefer the external package @uref{https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode, lsp-mode} as LSP client over Eglot, there's the @code{nael-lsp} package.

@end ifnottex

@menu
* Installation::
* Usage::
* Configuration::
* Changelog::
* License and Maintenance::

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Installation

* Installation from Melpa::
* Installation from Sources::

Installation from Sources

* Manual Installation::
* Installation via @code{package-vc}::

Changelog

* Version 0.7.0 from 2025-12-15: Version 070 from 2025-12-15. 
* Version 0.6.2 from 2025-11-30: Version 062 from 2025-11-30. 
* Version 0.6.0 from 2025-11-30: Version 060 from 2025-11-30. 

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

Nael's LSP-based features (via Eglot or lsp-mode), require Lean version 4 to be @uref{https://lean-lang.org/install/manual/, installed}.  If you want to use lsp-mode, you might need to install lsp-mode before @code{nael-lsp}.

@menu
* Installation from Melpa::
* Installation from Sources::
@end menu

@node Installation from Melpa
@section Installation from Melpa

@code{nael} is available on @uref{https://melpa.org/#/nael, Melpa} (and @uref{https://stable.melpa.org/#/nael, Melpa-Stable}) but @code{nael-lsp} not yet.  To install, first add the package-archive by adding this code to your Emacs initialization file and evaluating it interactively.

@lisp
(require 'package)
(add-to-list 'package-archives '("melpa" . "https://melpa.org/packages/") t)
(package-initialize)
@end lisp

Then type @samp{M-x package-refresh-contents RET}.  Finally, choose one of the following approaches:  To install interactively, type @samp{M-x package-install RET nael RET}.  To install via package selection, add @samp{(setopt package-selected-packages '(nael))} to your init file, evaluate it, and type @samp{M-x package-install-selected-packages RET}.  To install via Use-Package, add @samp{(use-package nael :ensure t)} to your init file and evaluate it.

@node Installation from Sources
@section Installation from Sources

@menu
* Manual Installation::
* Installation via @code{package-vc}::
@end menu

@node Manual Installation
@subsection Manual Installation

First clone the Git repository, then, in your Emacs initialization file, add Nael to @code{load-path} and load it.  For lazy loading the autoloads-file needs to be build beforehand.

@lisp
;; git clone https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael.git ~/path/to/nael

(add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/nael/nael")
;; (add-to-list 'load-path "~/path/to/nael/nael-lsp")

;; Option 1, eager loading:
(require 'nael)
;; (require 'nael-lsp)

;; Option 2, lazy loading:
;; cd ~/path/to/nael && ./build.el autoloads
;; (require 'nael-autoloads)
;; (require 'nael-lsp-autoloads)

;; Optionally, make readme available as info manual:
(require 'info)
(info-initialize)
(add-to-list 'Info-directory-list "~/path/to/nael/nael")
@end lisp

@node Installation via @code{package-vc}
@subsection Installation via @code{package-vc}

Since version 29 from 2023, Emacs ships with @code{package-vc} which enables the built-in package manager @code{package} to install from version-controlled source repositories.  Keep in mind to regularly upgrade such packages with the command @code{package-vc-upgrade} or @code{package-vc-upgrade-all}.  (And please ignore the warnings that arise when @code{package-vc} attempts to byte-compile all Elisp source files in the repository instead of just the package-specific ones.)

@enumerate
@item
@anchor{Installation via @code{package-vc-selected-packages}}Installation via @code{package-vc-selected-packages}


In your Emacs session, select packages per @code{package-vc-selected-packages} variable and install them with @samp{M-x package-vc-install-selected-packages RET}.  Persist the package selection in your Emacs initialization file too.  @code{package-vc} will generate the autoloads-file automatically.  To lazy-load Nael, load the autoloads-file.

@lisp
(require 'package-vc)

(setopt package-vc-selected-packages
        '((nael
           :doc "nael/README.org"
           :lisp-dir "nael"
           :url "https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael.git")
       ;; (nael-lsp
       ;;  :lisp-dir "nael-lsp"
       ;;  :url "https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael.git")
          ))

(package-initialize)

;; Option 1, lazy loading:
(require 'nael-autoloads)
;; (require 'nael-lsp-autoloads)

;; Option 2, eager loading:
;; (require 'nael)
;; (require 'nael-lsp)
@end lisp

@item
@anchor{Installation via @code{use-package} @samp{vc}}Installation via @code{use-package} @samp{:vc}


Since version 30 from 2025, Emacs' popular @code{use-package} macro supports a @samp{:vc} keyword as interface to @code{package-vc}.  (Because each package has autoload-cookies on relevant expressions, and because @code{use-package} will load the autoloads-file that is generated at installation, you don't need to specify load-triggers like @samp{:mode}.  I.e. lazy-loading should work out of the box.)

@lisp
(use-package nael
  :vc ( :doc "nael/README.org"
        :lisp-dir "nael"
        :url "https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael.git"))

;; (use-package nael-lsp
;;   :after nael
;;   :vc ( :lisp-dir "nael-lsp"
;;         :url "https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael.git"))
@end lisp
@end enumerate

@node Usage
@chapter Usage

Language Server Protocol (LSP):

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c C-e} (@code{eglot}) starts Eglot, the LSP client.
@item
@samp{C-h .} (@code{eldoc-doc-buffer}) displays the ElDoc documentation buffer showing tactic state and expected goal at point.
@item
@samp{C-c C-l} (@code{lsp}) starts lsp-mode, an alternative LSP client.  The key is only bound if @code{nael-lsp} is autoloaded.
@end itemize

Abbreviations:

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c C-a} (@code{abbrev-mode}) enables abbreviations.
@item
@samp{C-c C-k} (@code{nael-abbrev-help}) echoes abbreviations that expand to the character at point, or, if active, to the selected region.
@item
@samp{C-x '} (@code{expand-abbrev}) expands the abbreviation before point without any inserting any character.  (Usually, you'd insert a space or newline to expand.)
@end itemize

Build:

@itemize
@item
@samp{C-c C-c} (@code{project-compile}) prompts for a command to build the current project.  It will suggest @samp{lake build} because Nael configures the @code{compile-command} variable.
@end itemize

Navigation:

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-a} (@code{forward-sentence}) go to beginning of current sentence/block, or to previous one.
@item
@samp{M-e} (@code{backward-sentence}) go to end of current sentence/block, or to next one.
@item
@samp{M-g i} (@code{imenu}) jumps to an interactively chosen definition in current buffer.
@end itemize

Comments:

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-;} (@code{comment-dwim}) toggles the active region as comment or, if no region is active, creates a comment at end of line.
@item
@samp{M-q} (@code{prog-fill-reindent-defun}) fills the string- or comment-paragraph at point, or reindents the point-surrounding code.
@end itemize

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

To view the complete list of Nael's user option variables from within Emacs, customize the group @code{nael} (and its child-groups) with @samp{M-x customize-group RET nael RET}.  This chapter highlights and explains some user options by examples.

As an exception, Emacs customization groups cannot include keymaps.  You can bind custom keys in @code{nael-mode-map} like this:

@lisp
(keymap-set nael-mode-map "C-c ." #'highlight-symbol-at-point)
@end lisp

To automatically enable features (e.g. abbreviations, Eglot or lsp-mode) when Nael is started, customize @code{nael-mode-hook} as follows:

@lisp
(add-hook 'nael-mode-hook #'abbrev-mode)
(add-hook 'nael-mode-hook #'eglot-ensure)
@end lisp

Nael's Abbrev tables use the @samp{:regexp} property which is @uref{https://github.com/minad/cape/discussions/158#discussioncomment-14687758, incompatible} with @uref{https://github.com/company-mode/company-mode, Company}'s @code{company-abbrev} and @uref{https://github.com/minad/cape, Cape}'s @code{cape-abbrev}.  Instead, Nael supports completion-at-point natively via @code{nael-abbrev-capf}.  This CAPF is buffer-locally added to @code{completion-at-point-functions} whenever Abbrev mode is enabled inside Nael.  To ditch this feature, set the @code{nael-abbrev-capf} variable to @samp{nil}.

@node Changelog
@chapter Changelog

@menu
* Version 0.7.0 from 2025-12-15: Version 070 from 2025-12-15. 
* Version 0.6.2 from 2025-11-30: Version 062 from 2025-11-30. 
* Version 0.6.0 from 2025-11-30: Version 060 from 2025-11-30. 
@end menu

@node Version 070 from 2025-12-15
@section Version 0.7.0 from 2025-12-15

@itemize
@item
Remove the @code{nael-markdown} package.  Move its code into @code{nael} package instead.  (Wrapped into @code{with-eval-after-load}.)
@item
@code{nael} is now on @uref{https://melpa.org/#/nael, Melpa} and @uref{https://stable.melpa.org/#/nael, Melpa-Stable}.  @code{nael-lsp} is not there yet.
@end itemize

@node Version 062 from 2025-11-30
@section Version 0.6.2 from 2025-11-30

@itemize
@item
Re-add readme as .texi and .info to repository because Nael might soon be added to Melpa which won't build Info manuals itself.
@end itemize

@node Version 060 from 2025-11-30
@section Version 0.6.0 from 2025-11-30

@itemize
@item
Remove .texi, .info, and -autoloads.el files from repository.  Thus, don't load autoloads-files from other Elisp sources.  This makes Nael compatible with package-vc.
@item
build.el: Only build files/targets passed as command-line arguments.  Valid arguments are abbreviations, autoloads, compile, info and root-readme.
@item
dir-locals.el: Remove an assignment of a non-core Emacs variable which lead to Emacs asking for confirmation.
@item
README: Provide installation instructions via package-vc-selected-packages and use-package :vc.
@item
Add several autoload-cookies.  This allows for simpler use-package expressions.
@item
README: Add changelog chapter.
@item
nael, nael-abbrev:
@itemize
@item
Rename nael-abbrev-table-only-singletons to nael-abbrev-singleton-table.
@item
Rename nael-abbrev-table-only-skeletons to nael-abbrev-skeleton-table.
@end itemize
@end itemize

@node License and Maintenance
@chapter License and Maintenance

Nael is effectively licensed under GNU GPL version 3 only.  More precisely, it is licensed under Apache-2.0 and sublicensed under GPL-3.0.

Nael is maintained by @emph{Mekeor Melire} (@email{mailto:mekeor@@posteo.de, mekeor@@posteo.de}) on @uref{https://codeberg.org/mekeor/nael, Codeberg}.

@bye
